                                                  IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                  S.R. Soleti et al


                                                                   Physics in Medicine & Biology

                                                                   PAPER
                                                  Crossmark
                                                  RECEIVED
                                                  dd Month yyyy
                                                                   CRYSP: a Total-Body PET based on cryogenic cesium iodide
                                                  REVISED
                                                  dd Month yyyy
                                                                   crystals
                                                                   S.R. Soleti1,2,∗ , P. Dietz1 , R. Esteve3 , J. Garcı́a-Barrena3 , V. Herrero3 , F. Lopez1 , F. Monrabal1,2 ,
                                                                   L. Navarro-Cozcolluela1,4 , E. Oblak1 , J. Pelegrı́n1 , J. Renner5 , J. Toledo3 , S. Torelli1 , and
                                                                   J.J. Gómez-Cadenas1,2
                                                                   1 Donostia International Physics Center, San Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
                                                                   2 Ikerbasque (Basque Foundation for Science), Bilbao, E-48009, Spain




arXiv:2507.09765v2 [physics.ins-det] 2 Jan 2026
                                                                   3 Instituto de Instrumentación para Imagen Molecular (I3M), Centro Mixto CSIC - Universitat Politècnica de València,

                                                                   Valencia, E-46022, Spain
                                                                   4 Universidad del Paı́s Vasco (UPV/EHU), San Sebastián / Donostia, E-20018, Spain
                                                                   5 Instituto de Fı́sica Corpuscular (IFIC), CSIC & Universitat de València, Paterna, E-46980, Spain
                                                                   ∗ Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.



                                                                   E-mail: roberto.soleti@dipc.org

                                                                   Keywords: Biomedical imaging, Total Body PET, Positron emission tomography, Crystals, Cryogenics


                                                                   Abstract
                                                                   Objective. Total Body PET (TBPET) scanners have the potential to substantially reduce
                                                                   both acquisition time and administered radiation dose, owing to their high sensitivity. How-
                                                                   ever, their widespread clinical adoption is hindered by the high cost of currently available
                                                                   systems. This work explores the use of pure cesium iodide (CsI) monolithic crystals op-
                                                                   erated at cryogenic temperatures as a cost-effective alternative to rare-earth scintillators
                                                                   for TBPET. Approach. We investigate the performance of pure CsI crystals operated at
                                                                   cryogenic temperatures (∼100 K), where they achieve a light yield of approximately 105
                                                                   photons/MeV. The implications for energy resolution, spatial resolution (including depth-
                                                                   of-interaction capability), and timing performance are assessed, with a view toward their
                                                                   integration into a TBPET system. Main results. Cryogenic CsI crystals demonstrated en-
                                                                   ergy resolution below 7% and coincidence time resolution at the nanosecond level, despite
                                                                   their relatively slow scintillation decay time. A Monte Carlo simulation of monolithic CsI
                                                                   crystals shows that a millimeter-scale spatial resolution in all three dimensions can be ob-
                                                                   tained. These characteristics indicate that high-performance PET imaging is achievable with
                                                                   this technology. Significance. A TBPET scanner based on cryogenic CsI monolithic crys-
                                                                   tals could combine excellent imaging performance with significantly reduced detector costs,
                                                                   enabling broader accessibility and accelerating the adoption of TBPET in both clinical and
                                                                   research settings.

                                                                   1 Introduction
                                                                   Positron emission tomography (PET) is a powerful imaging technique central to medical diagnostic
                                                                   applications, employing positron-emitting radionuclides to track biologically active molecules. The
                                                                   annihilation of the positrons produced by the radiotracer with the electrons of the surrounding
                                                                   environment generates back-to-back gamma rays of 511 keV, which are detected to create detailed
                                                                   images of functional processes within the body.
                                                                       The last decade has witnessed the development of Total Body PET (TBPET) scanners with axial
                                                                   fields-of-view (AFOV) between 3 and 7 times that of conventional PET (CPET) apparatus. Such
                                                                   devices detect a large fraction of the emitted photons, thus dramatically increasing sensitivity, and
                                                                   allowing for simultaneous dynamic acquisition from all tissues of interest [1, 2]. TBPETs also offer
                                                                   the flexibility of optimizing signal-to-noise ratio, reducing the acquisition time, or decreasing the
                                                                   amount of administered radiation dose.
                                                                       Prime examples of such TBPETs are the United Imaging uEXPLORER [3], and Siemens Bio-
                                                                   graph Vision Quadra [4]. The AFOV of uEXPLORER is 194 cm, while the AFOV of the smaller
                                                                   Quadra is 106 cm, to be compared with an AFOV of 20-30 cm typical of a CPET (e.g., the new
                                                                   generation General Electric Omni Legend 32 [5] has an AFOV of 32 cm). Both TBPET systems


                                                                                                                   1
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                 S.R. Soleti et al



                                                            Computed Tomography
                                                            Electronics                                                x7.7
                                                            Scintillator
                                                            SiPM
                                                                                                         x5.5




                                   PET cost [a.u.]
                                                                                              x4


                                                                         x2.8




                                                           20            70              100             140           200
                                                                                  Axial Length [cm]

                 Figure 1: Increase in component costs for a 70-cm, 100-cm, 140-cm and 200-cm system versus a
                 system with 20 cm axial length; the y-axis is the system cost in relative units. Data taken from
                 ref. [1].


                 use arrays of pixelated lutetium-yttrium oxyorthosilicate (LYSO) crystals, read out by SiPMs and
                 custom electronics, with very high sensitivity and excellent time-of-flight (TOF) resolution. The ap-
                 proximate increase in cost of the uEXPLORER (Quadra) compared with a typical CPET is roughly
                 8 (4) times (see fig. 1), well above what can be afforded by most hospitals.

                                                     1.0
                                                                Point at the axial center
                                                                Point at 10 cm from one end
                                                                10 cm line
                                                     0.8        100 cm line
                                                                200 cm line




                                   Acceptance
                                                     0.6



                                                     0.4



                                                     0.2



                                                     0.0
                                                                25      50        75     100       125     150   175         200
                                                                                   Axial Length [cm]

                 Figure 2: The geometrical acceptance for a point-like source placed at the axial center, a point-like
                 source placed 10 cm from one end of the scanner, and line sources of 10 cm, 100 cm and 200 cm
                 length, as a function of the axial length. It is calculated in the transverse center of a PET scanner
                 with a diameter of 80 cm.

                     The bulk of the cost in both systems comes from the scintillator, followed by the cost of the SiPMs
                 and electronics. Of the three items, the cost of SiPMs, in large quantities, is roughly proportional
                 to the total surface of chips deployed (not to the size of the chip), and thus proportional to the
                 size and coverage of the scanner. However, the cost of SiPMs decreases about 5-10 % annually,
                 with current prices about one third of those ten years ago. Thus their relative contribution to the
                 total cost of future TBPETs will steadily decrease with time. Instead, the cost of crystals and that
                 of the readout electronics has remained stable, and in the case of LYSO, significantly expensive.
                 Thus, the first priority of any putative low-cost TBPET is to find significantly cheaper alternatives
                 to LYSO. Notice that, in addition to the high cost, LYSO is a rare earth whose production and


                                                                              2
       IOP Publishing       Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                                                   S.R. Soleti et al



                        manufacturing is heavily concentrated. Last but not least, the cost of the readout electronics can
                        be decreased for large scale production developing specific ASICs, and, importantly, reducing the
                        number of electronics channels.
                             Naturally, one also desires performance comparable to that of current PET scanners. This, in
                        turn, requires quantifying the contribution of the extended axial length of a TBPET scanner to the
                        quality of image reconstruction.
                             Figure 2 shows the geometrical acceptance for two point-like sources (serving as rough approxi-
                        mations of small organs), one positioned at the center of a scanner with an 80 cm diameter and the
                                                  Requirements,
                        other located 10 cm from one                Interferences,
                                                            end, as a function       and
                                                                                of the   Verifications
                                                                                       axial               33 centrally placed source,
                                                                                             length. For the
                        approximately 80% of the solid angle is already covered at a scanner length of 100 cm. In contrast,
                        for the source near the edge (e.g., the brain in a TBPET), the acceptance quickly plateaus: photons
patient motions and the      visualization
                        emitted    toward theonopen
                                                  a end
                                                     monitor   or a
                                                           of the     film. On
                                                                  scanner       a technical
                                                                            escape             level, the
                                                                                   detection, and   increasing the AFOV beyond this
performance of a PET        detector
                        point   offers is
                                        no mainly    defined
                                            additional benefit.by its    energy-,
                                                                  Overall,  most oftime-, andinspatial-
                                                                                     the gain     geometrical acceptance is achieved
resolutions, as well as its sensitivity.
                        within the    first 100 cm of axial coverage, with only marginal improvements beyond that length.
                             The choice for a PET scanner of 100 cm length is also motivated by the approximate axial
                        distribution of whole-body organs of interest (e.g., brain to pelvis) for typical human height. The
3.1.1.1 Energy Resolution
                        figure shows that, with an extended source of 100 cm, one gains in geometrical acceptance from 50%
When the gamma photons        travel
                        (100 cm       throughtomatter,
                                    scanner),            they can
                                                  about 80%          undergo
                                                               (200 cm         Compton
                                                                          scanner),      scatter,
                                                                                     a modest      which compared with cost. Thus,
                                                                                                increased
entails that the photon loses some energy to an outer electron of the matter and the direction
                        an  AFOV      of about  100  cm  as  implemented    by the  Quadra   appears  as a good compromise between
of the photon is changed (see section 2.1.2). These scattered events have different LOR than
                        cost  and   performance    and a  reasonable   target for any  TBPET     proposal.
the true events and, thus, result in increased image background noise (Figure 23).

                                                                                                                             500




                                                                                        Scattered photon energy Eγ 0 [keV]
                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                             450                               Eγ 0 = 1+(Eγ /meγ)(1−cos θ)
                                                         Body
                                             wrong               Scatter                                                     400
                                             LOR
                                                                                                                             350
                                                                   PET
                                                                  tracer                                                     300


                                                                                                                             250
                                                                                                                                   0   15       30        45           60          75        90
                                                                                                                                            Compton scattering angle θ [◦]
   Figure 23: Scattered gamma photons result in(a)
                                                wrongly assumed LORs that increase the image (b)
                                       background noise.
                          Figure 3: (a) Compton scatter detection in PET. In Compton scattering a photon (in yellow) un-
By measuring the energy        of the
                          dergoes   an gamma,
                                         interaction it within
                                                        is possible     to determine
                                                                  the patient’s     body whether         the detected
                                                                                           where it changes        direction and loses energy. Thus,
gamma was scattered. the  Figure
                              PET24scanner
                                         shows a    typically a
                                                 reconstructs     measured
                                                                     wrong LOR  energy    spectrum
                                                                                      (in red),          of a the
                                                                                                   affecting   positron
                                                                                                                    signal-to-background ratio of the
emission source: The photopeak
                          reconstructedis found
                                             image.at (b)
                                                       around Theanresidual
                                                                       energy of     511 Eγ
                                                                                energy    keV.    Scattered
                                                                                              ′ of a   511-keV  gamma
                                                                                                                   incoming photon after Compton
photons (with lower residual
                          scatteringenergy)
                                       with aare     mostly
                                                 given          found around the Compton plateau. The
                                                         angle θ.
plateau reaches from the Compton edge (maximum energy loss by the incident photon
through Compton scattering)   But tois the
                                       thatbackscatter
                                              extra lengthpeak  worth (caused    by gamma
                                                                         the added               photons scattered
                                                                                       cost? Addressing         this question requires consideration
back from surrounding material before detection). The histogram, furthermore, showsaccompanying
                          not  only   of  the  improved      geometrical     acceptance     but    also  of  the   some             increase in gamma-
                          ray  absorption      and   Compton       scattering     (CS)
counts with higher energy than the photopeak , which are caused by detecting energy from
                                                           6                             within     the   patient’s    body,  as  well as the effects of
                          parallax
more than one gamma photon.          error   (PE).  These     effects  become     more   pronounced       as  gammas     travel  at increasingly oblique
                          angles. Increased gamma absorption results in loss of events and is an unavoidable effect. CS and
The energy resolution PE describes    how an
                               introduce     wellerror
                                                   the in
                                                        energy
                                                             the can be     measured,
                                                                  reconstruction           and it thus
                                                                                       of the               represents
                                                                                                line-of-response      (LOR), and thus contribute to
the sharpness of the image
                         measured     photopeak.
                                  blurring.     Both An     energy
                                                       effects   can bewindow
                                                                          minimizedcan bebyset and
                                                                                             instrumentala part of    the
                                                                                                                choices.
scattered gammas can thus     Thebe impact
                                    rejectedof(then
                                                  CS, counting
                                                        exemplified  to in
                                                                        thefig. 3,
                                                                              attenuated
                                                                                     can be gammas).
                                                                                               minimizedThe   by mean
                                                                                                                  choosing a narrow window around
path for a 511 keV photon 511 in   water
                                keV,   whichis about
                                                selects70events
                                                             mm, so    in deposit
                                                                    that   clinical all
                                                                                      PET,   most of
                                                                                          their    energythein the
                                                                                                               gammas  crystal. The efficiency of this
are scattered. In preclinical applications, this depends on the size of the scanned animal: Conversely, if one selects
                          selection,   in   turn,  improves      with   the   energy    resolution     of  the   crystal.
while for rabbits (with events    in a around
                          diameters      fixed energy
                                                  160 mm)window,many thegammas
                                                                           numberare  of events
                                                                                          scatters,which
                                                                                                       thishave   suffered
                                                                                                              is not  the scattering in the patient’s
                          body   decreases    as  energy     resolution   improves.
case for mice (with a diameter around 30 mm). Nevertheless, the mouse-sized phantom
studies (presented in chapter Conventional
                                      6.2.4.1) PET
                                                 have scanners
                                                          shown that are made       of pixelated
                                                                            a narrower      energy   detectors,
                                                                                                         window with still crystals of small transverse
                          dimensions and a thickness of typically 2 radiation lengths (e.g., 3.2 × 3.2 × 20 mm3 for the Quadra).
                          For a gamma impinging at angles normal to the crystal surface (small transaxial angles), the resolu-
6 Additionally, the energytion  in the transaxial coordinates depends only on the transverse size of the pixel, and the resolution
                           spectrum of 22Na actually has a second small photopeak around
                          on the
   1.274 MeV. It is a single gammadepth-of-interaction        (d.o.i.),when
                                       photon, which is emitted          which thedepends
                                                                                    nucleuson     the pixel
                                                                                              decays    from thickness,
                                                                                                               an           does not significantly affect
   excited state.         the reconstruction. While d.o.i. information can be incorporated into pixelated detectors through



                                                                               3
 PET and the Influence from MRI
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                      S.R. Soleti et al



                 dedicated schemes (such as dual-ended readout, phoswich configurations, or depth-segmented crys-
                 tals), the standard pixelated blocks used in current TBPET systems do not provide this information,
                 increasing the PE at large angles [6, 7].
                     Although techniques exist to compensate for CS and PE [8], their overall effect is to degrade the
                 contribution to image reconstruction of gammas emitted at high angles and therefore to partially
                 negate the increase in sensitivity afforded by the longer axial coverage of a TBPET.
                     In this paper, we propose a new type of TBPET scanner called CRYSP1 . CRYSP is based on large
                 monolithic crystals made of pure cesium iodide (CsI) operating at cryogenic temperatures. The light
                 output of these crystals is very high (about 105 photons/MeV [9, 10]), which translates into excellent
                 energy resolution, below 7% at 511 keV [11]. This performance, combined with the monolithic form
                 factor, allows to achieve a millimeter-scale spatial resolution in all three dimensions, minimizing the
                 PE. As we will show in the next sections, these features allow to achieve performances that are
                 comparable to the ones of current state-of-the-art TBPET scanners, at a significantly reduced cost.
                     This paper is organized as follows. Section 2.1 discusses the potential of pure, cryogenic CsI
                 as scintillator material for PET, and how the choice of this material leads naturally to monolithic
                 crystals. Section 2.2 describes the CRYSP baseline design and section 2.3 focuses on the dedicated
                 electronics. The modelization of the apparatus using the Geant4 simulation framework [12] is detailed
                 in section 2.4. Section 2.5 discusses our strategy to reconstruct the gamma impact coordinates using
                 convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The main parameters illustrating CRYSP performance fol-
                 lowing the NEMA guidelines (e.g., sensitivity, NECR, spatial resolution), compared with a reference
                 detector based on pixelated LYSO crystals, are discussed throughout sections 3.1 to 3.4. Section 3.5
                 offers an evaluation of the two apparatus imaging performances using a modified Jaszczak phantom.
                 A discussion of the implications of our findings on the development of TBPET scanners is included
                 in section 4. Conclusions are presented in section 5.

                 Table 1: Properties of scintillating materials commonly used for PET, compared with scintillators
                 based on cesium iodide. Data for LYSO, BGO and CsI(Tl) have been obtained from vendor [13] and
                 are intended at room temperature. Values for CsI were measured in ref. [11]. Cost is normalized
                 by one radiation length X0 . The range in prices depends on the quality of the material and the
                 manufacturing process, with pixelated blocks being more expensive that monolithic crystals for a
                 fixed volume.

                   Material     Zef f   X0 (cm)    ρ (g/cm3 )   LY (ph./MeV)     τ (ns)   Peak (nm)    Cost (e/cm3 · X0 )
                    LYSO         66      1.14          7.4         33,000          53        420             50-80
                     BGO         74      1.12          7.1          9,000         300        480             25-35
                    CsI:Tl       54      1.86          4.5         54,000         1000       560              7-10
                  CsI (300 K)    54      1.86          4.5          5,000          15        310              7-10
                  CsI (100 K)    54      1.86          4.5         100,000        800        350              7-10




                 2 Methods and materials
                 2.1 CsI as a scintillator material for PET
                 Table 1 shows the properties of cesium iodide compared with other crystals commonly used for
                 PET. Pure CsI at ambient temperature has been adopted in particle physics for experiments set in
                 high-rate and high-radiation environments, given its fast decay time and radiation hardness [14, 15].
                 However, at a first glance, its low light yield (5 photons/keV), UV emission, average radiation length
                 and density make it a sub-optimal candidate for PET.
                     Cooling pure CsI to cryogenic temperatures, approximately 100 K, causes its light emission
                 spectrum to shift towards the near ultraviolet range, moving from around 310 nm to 350 nm [16].
                 This process also increases its light yield by a factor of 20, to about 100 photons/keV [9, 10, 17].
                 Unfortunately, its decay time also increases, approximately by a factor of 50, from 15 ns to 800 ns.
                 In a PET scanner, the coincidence time resolution (CTR) between pairs of crystals is determined by
                 the material’s emission time profile and amount of light detected. An approximate figure of merit is
                 given by [18]:

                                                                          τ
                                                                      r
                                                              CTR ∝            ,                                    (1)
                                                                         Np.e.
                 where τ is the decay time constant and Np.e. is the number of detected photoelectrons.
                   1 The acronym stands simultaneously for CRYStal PET and for CRYogenic ceSium PET.




                                                           4
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                      S.R. Soleti et al



                    Using eq. (1) to compare the CTR for CsI operating at ambient temperature and at 100 K we
                 obtain:

                                                         s
                                                             800 ns 5 p.e./keV
                                           CTR100 K ≈              ·             · CTR300 K                           (2)
                                                              15 ns 100 p.e./keV
                                                      ≈ 1.6 · CTR300 K .
                 Thus, since the time resolution at room temperature is at the nanosecond level [19], effective coin-
                 cidence timing should be possible also at 100 K, in spite of the long decay time, as we will discuss
                 further in section 3.
                     In a previous paper [11] we measured the energy resolution and coincident time resolution (CTR)
                 for a pair of pure CsI crystals at cryogenic temperatures read out by solid state photosensors (Hama-
                 matsu MPPCs). At T = 104 K, an energy resolution better than 7% FWHM and a coincidence
                 time resolution lower than 2 ns FWHM have been achieved. While these are already very promising
                 results, we believe there is still room for improvement, in particular when using large monolithic
                 crystals, SiPMs with higher PDE at 350 nm and optimized electronics. In fact, the intrinsic res-
                 olution of cryogenic CsI at 511 keV is approximately 5% [20], and one of the crystals showed a
                 resolution of 6.3%, which we will take as default for the studies presented here. For the CTR, we use
                 a conservative estimate of 1.5 ns, based on the 1.84 ns obtained with the tabletop setup of ref. [11].

                 2.2 CRYSP
                 The basic building block of CRYSP is a monolithic crystal, of dimensions 48 × 48 × 37 mm3 , where
                 the crystal thickness corresponds to 2 radiation lengths. All crystal surfaces are polished, and five of
                 the six faces are wrapped in PTFE to ensure a reflectivity > 95%. The wrapping adds about 2 mm to
                 the crystal transverse dimensions. Full wrapping with a good reflector is a must for energy resolution,
                 and in the case of CsI, the relatively hard emission wavelength limits the potential reflectors, with
                 PTFE being the best option [21]. Each crystal is read out by an array of 8 × 8 Hamamatsu S14160-
                 6050HS MPPCs [22]. These photosensors have an active area of 6 × 6 mm2 and a photon detection
                 efficiency of approximately 38% at the emission wavelength of cryogenic CsI [22]. Low-temperature
                 SiPM operation is already well established in large-scale particle physics experiments [23, 24, 25]. At
                 77 K, the dark count rate is reduced by several orders of magnitude, afterpulsing and optical cross-
                 talk are suppressed, and the gain remains stable after compensating for the decrease of breakdown
                 voltage with temperature (≈ 50 mV/K) [26, 22]. The photon detection efficiency in the blue–UV
                 region is mostly unaffected at cryogenic temperatures, making SiPMs well suited for the scintillation
                 spectrum of CsI [27, 28].
                      Thus, an interaction in the crystal results in an image of 8 × 8 pixels, where the intensity in each
                 pixel is determined by the photoelectrons recorded by each SiPM (fig. 4).

                                              Table 2: CRYSP1M scanner specifications.

                                      Parameter                             Specification
                                      Crystal size                       48 × 48 × 37 mm3
                                      SiPM area                              6 × 6 mm2
                                      SiPM model                      Hamamatsu S14160-6050HS
                                      SiPMs per crystal                           64
                                      Detector ring diameter                   77.4 cm
                                      PET AFOV                                102.4 cm
                                      Detector rings                               20
                                      Crystals per ring                           48
                                      Total number of crystals                    960
                                      Total number of channels                  61,440
                                      Energy resolution                          6.3%
                                      Energy window                         465–555 keV
                                      Coincidence time resolution               1.5 ns
                                      Coincidence time window                   4.5 ns
                                      Operating temperature                      77 K


                    For definiteness, we consider a CRYSP scanner with dimensions similar to those of the Quadra
                 (CRYSP1M). This corresponds to an effective diameter of ∼ 774 mm and an effective length of ∼


                                                           5
n reconstruction with deep learning
          IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                         S.R. Soleti et al


                                                                  Monolithic crystal                                    Monolithic crystal

rning algorithm

                                                 SiPMs matrix                                          SiPMs matrix
ct the
 the gamma in a
out by a matrix of

                                                                  z = °12.20 mm                                             z = 17.30 mm
of a Convolutional                              24

d on 8x8                                                                                        1000                                                   300

corresponding to                                12

each SiPM.                                                                                      800
                                                                                                                                                       250

                                      y [mm]     0
                                                                                                600                                                          # p.e.
n is assumed, with                                                                                                                                     200
eing fully                                     °12                                              400

                                                                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                200

explored, giving                               °24
                                                 °24            °12      0       12        24          °24            °12        0         12   24
                                                                      x [mm]                                                   x [mm]


on in the three            Figure 4: Charge collected by the SiPM matrix coupled to a monolithic crystal for two different
                           interactions, one close to the SiPMs plane (z = −12.20 mm) and one near the crystal entrance
                           (z = 17.30 mm). The red dot corresponds to the simulated interaction point. The difference between
                           the two patterns is exploited by a neural network to reconstruct the d.o.i. (here the z coordinate).

LY 2024                                                                                                                12
                           1024 mm, which translates to 20 rings, where each ring is comprised of 48 crystals of 50×50×38 mm3 ,
                           including wrapping. Thus, CRYSP1M deploys a total of 960 crystals and 61,440 channels (compared
                           with the 243,200 of the Quadra). System specifications are detailed in table 2.
                               The CRYSP scanner is enclosed within a double-walled cryostat filled with liquid nitrogen (LN2 )
                           that maintains the crystals and SiPMs at approximately 78 K, as shown in figure 5. The estimated
                           thermal load of 365 W corresponds to an LN2 evaporation rate of 7.6 L/h, resulting in an annual
                           consumption below 70,000 L (≈ 30, 000 €/year). The inner and outer vessels are separated by
                           vacuum layers with multilayer insulation, and all SiPM signals are extracted via compact PCB
                           feedthroughs validated in similar cryogenic environments [29, 30]. These mechanical and thermal
                           parameters define the stable operating temperature assumed in simulation and demonstrate the
                           feasibility of continuous cryogenic operation.
                               When a gamma interacts in a crystal, the readout ASIC digitizes the charge in each of the 64
                           channels and sends 64 × 2 numbers to an FPGA, corresponding to the integrated charge and the
                           timestamp value, as described in section 2.3. The FPGA computes the time of interaction assigned
                           to the crystal (e.g., by taking an OR of the individual timestamps), as well as the total energy
                           and the interaction vertex. The latter is achieved by passing the digitized signals (the 8 × 8 pixels
                           comprising the “image” provided by the crystal) in real-time through a pre-trained CNN running on
                           the FPGA itself (see section 2.5). Thus, the information provided by each crystal is reduced to five
                           numbers: time, energy and the three coordinates of the interaction vertex.
                               Given the relatively long decay time of CsI (τ ≈ 1 µs), integration of the full charge requires
                           roughly 3τ ≈ 3 µs. On the other hand, the very high luminosity of the crystal results in a fast
                           rise time, allowing for a CTR in the range of 1-2 ns, as detailed in section 2.1. Consequently, the
                           system can accommodate high event rates. While this CTR value is too large to support TOF
                           measurements, this limitation has an upside: the requirements on the electronics, which are usually
                           demanding in TOF-PET systems [31, 32], can be relaxed, further reducing costs.
                               Although the CTR is good enough to resolve coincidences, a fraction of events will still be lost or
                           misreconstructed because of pile-up (e.g., events in which a second gamma interacts in the crystal
                           before the integration of the energy of the first event is over). A dedicated pile-up processor is
                           described in section 2.3.2 and its effect is quantified in section 3.4.

                           2.3 Electronics for CRYSP
                           The baseline design of CRYSP1M employs front-end integration into an application-specific inte-
                           grated circuit (ASIC) to bring the information processing closer to the sensors. Therefore, the


                                                                                       6
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                      S.R. Soleti et al




                 Figure 5: CAD drawings of two sections of the CRYSP conceptual design, showing the different
                 parts of the scanner. The crystals, in purple, are placed in a volume filled with liquid nitrogen and
                 read out by a matrix of SiPMs, in green. This volume is separated from the environment by a thin
                 volume at vacuum on the inner side, facing the patient, and a larger volume at vacuum on the outer
                 side, which houses the PCB feedthroughs (in blue). These two vacuum chambers provide thermal
                 insulation to the liquid nitrogen volume.


                 functionality of the system can be enhanced introducing new features which otherwise could not be
                 implemented offline due to the high amount of data needed to be sent to the data acquisition (DAQ)
                 system. The proposed detector architecture enables a customization of the front-end design that
                 exploits detected signal characteristics allowing for unique features such as event pile-up processing
                 and optimized timestamp generation.

                 2.3.1 Timestamp Any PET-oriented front-end requires a timestamp generation system with a
                 suitable resolution in order to enable event coincidence filtering. Although CRYSP relies on energy
                 resolution to reject Compton-scattered gammas, an enhanced coincidence filter will help to minimize
                 accidental LORs. High-precision timestamp generating systems depend on accurate clock distribu-
                 tion and synchronization schemes. Moreover, this dedicated hardware must be integrated all along
                 the DAQ data flow, even at the front-end level. This requirement implies a significant increase in
                 costs related to electronic systems. As a consequence, a trade-off between system synchronization
                 complexity and CTR must be observed. In order to improve the latter, a customized time-walk
                 correction mechanism has been proposed for our integrated front-end.
                     The usual strategy is to approximate timestamp values by T0 crossing time, whose precision is
                 limited by timing resolution. A simple Time-to-Digital Converter (TDC) scheme can easily achieve
                 resolutions below 100 ps with relatively slow clocks (20 ns period) [33] using affordable ADC con-
                 verters (less than 9 bits). However, there is a significant effect related to signal slope behavior (time
                 walk ) that blurs effective timestamp resolution [34]. In order to reduce this effect a very low thresh-
                 old can be employed. Therefore, false pulse detection probability would increase due to noise in the
                 input stages of the front-end. Introducing control mechanisms to reject false pulse detection would
                 increase hardware complexity. However, a different approach will be introduced in the development
                 of this integrated front-end: different time values of the pulse waveform will be used to predict an
                 enhanced timestamp value.
                     The proposed time-walk correction algorithm relies on several threshold crossing times of the
                 rising slope of the pulse signal (see fig. 6). The time intervals between these points along with the
                 first (and lowest) threshold crossing point T0 , can be used to predict the true origin of the pulse
                 signal:

                                         TS = C0 · T0 + C1 · ∆T1 + C2 · ∆T2 + · · · + Cn · ∆Tn ,                      (3)
                 where ∆T1 , ∆T2 , . . . , ∆Tn correspond to the difference between consecutive threshold crossing times
                 and TS to the timestamp. The required weights C0 , C1 , . . . , Cn can be estimated through simulation
                 using a simple multiple linear regression learning algorithm.
                    Furthermore, the final timestamp value can be computed in an analogue fashion, reducing the
                 amount of digital data to a coarse clock period counter and the corrected TDC output value.



                                                           7
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                            S.R. Soleti et al



                    This mechanism is implemented on a per-channel basis, meaning the precise timestamp of the
                 event recorded at the detector level is computed off-chip. Typically, the first timestamp among a
                 group of channels is selected as the most accurate event timestamp.


                                                                     Channel signal (rising edge)
                                                         0.5
                                                               TH3

                                                         0.4
                                                               TH2




                                        Voltage [a.u.]
                                                         0.3
                                                               TH1

                                                         0.2
                                                               TH0                T0


                                                         0.1
                                                               Timestamp

                                                         0.0
                                                                           ∆Ts         ∆T1   ∆T2   ∆T3

                                                               0       2         4           6      8    10
                                                                                 Time [ns]

                 Figure 6: The time-walk correction principle for the rising edge of a signal example. The time
                 intervals between several threshold crossing times and the first (and lowest) threshold crossing point
                 T0 can be used to predict the true origin of the pulse signal.


                 2.3.2 Pile-up processor Due to the long decay time of cryogenic CsI (approximately 1 µs) and the
                 use of monolithic crystals, pile-up is a significant concern in CRYSP. Thus, a novel pile-up processor
                 based on a peak detection mechanism [35] has been developed for the integrated front-end. For
                 clarity, the method is illustrated using the common scenario of two overlapping pulses in a pile-up
                 event, although it can be extended to handle multiple overlapping pulses.
                     The peak detection system has been enhanced to extract information from several key signal
                 points, identified by changes in the slope sign of the input signal. To achieve this, an analog derivative
                 computation circuit has been proposed to generate the necessary control signals. The frequency
                 response of this circuit is critical, as it directly impacts the accuracy and limitations of the pile-up
                 processor.
                     In a two-event pile-up scenario, only three key points are required to determine the energy of both
                 events (see fig. 7a). Two of these points, A and C, represent the peak positions of the first and second
                 events, respectively. The third point, B, corresponds to the start of the second event, which overlaps
                 with the tail of the first event. In an event without pile-up, the peak magnitude is directly related
                 to the event’s energy, as the signal shape consistently follows the same time distribution function.
                 Consequently, the energy of the first event can be accurately determined from the amplitude at point
                 A.
                     However, the energy of the second event cannot be directly inferred from the amplitude at point
                 C, as the second peak is affected by the downward slope of the first event. To address this, a
                 correction factor must be introduced to accurately determine the true peak amplitude of the second
                 event.
                     This correction is based on B point time position related to first event starting point, and rise
                 time value of the pulses which is a known constant value. A correction method has been proposed
                 to obtain the right amplitude for the second pulse peak at different pile-up delays using statistical
                 data.
                     This operation is an approximation to a deconvolution of the down slope effect of the first pulse,
                 and can be computed offline after data acquisition. Only three data must be converted to digital and
                 sent to the DAQ system: A peak value, B time position and C − B difference (second event peak
                 amplitude to be corrected offline). However, these data must be accurately sampled and latched


                                                                       8
                                                                                                                     You
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                     S.R.
                                                                                                             November 27,   Soleti et al
                                                                                                                          2024



                                                                                                                D1
                                   1.0                              Signal
                                             A             C
                                                                                                                            J1


                  Voltage [a.u.]
                                   0.5
                                                                                                                            CA        CC
                                                                                                        IN
                                                      B

                                   0.0
                                   1.0



                  Voltage [a.u.]
                                                               Signal derivative
                                   0.5           J1                                                             D2          J2   J1
                                   0.0
                                                          J2
                                                                                                                            CB
                                         0   1000     2000      3000     4000      5000   6000   7000
                                                                  Time [ns]

                                                                 (a)                                                  (b)
                                                                 Figure 1: Modified multiple peak detector for pile-up process
                 Figure 7: (a) Example of signal with pile-up (top) and its derivative (bottom), showing the latching
                 times for J1 and J2 . (b) Modified multiple peak detector for pile-up processing. The CA capacitor
                 stores the first peak, latched by J1 upon the derivative signal’s positive-to-negative transition. J1
                 disables CB charging path, turning it into a falling peak detector. J2 , triggered by a negative-to-
                 positive transition, latches CB to point B, while CC detects the second peak with D1 , storing its
                 maximum value.


                 timely enough to accomplish the ADC operations. The proposed algorithm can be implemented as
                 a modified multiple peak detector (fig. 7b) whose control signals rely on the aforementioned analog
                 derivative computation. First of all, the capacitor CA stores the first peak and the J1 control signal
                 latches its value, which prevents it from losing peak information when the signal rises above it again.
                 J1 will be generated with the first change of the derivative signal from positive-to-negative values.
                 At the same time, J1 breaks CB charge path through D1 , so it turns into a falling peak detector
                 along with D2 . When J2 is activated by a negative-to-positive change in the derivative signal, CB
                 gets latched with B point value. In the second event, CC acts now as a peak detector along with
                 D1 , then the second peak value gets stored in this capacitor until the maximum value is reached.
                     Given the timing characteristics of the detector signals and the method used to generate the
                 peak detector control signals, there is a limit to the allowable time overlap between pile-up pulses. A
                 conservative estimate on this limit gives a value of approximately 500 ns. The effect of the unresolved
                 pile-up is quantified in detail in section 3.4.

                 2.4 Modeling CRYSP
                 A detailed microphysical simulation of CRYSP has been performed using the Geant4 simulation
                 framework [12]. Two different applications have been implemented: one detailing a single monolithic
                 crystal read out by a matrix of 8 × 8 SiPMs of size 6 × 6 mm2 and one with the baseline design of a
                 full CRYSP1M scanner.
                     The first application was used to study in detail the performances of monolithic crystals. The
                 emission spectrum of CsI at cryogenic temperatures and the photon detection 1   efficiency of the pho-
                 tosensor were set according to specifications [22]. Several possible wrapping materials (e.g., PTFE,
                 ESR [36]) and coverage combinations were tested. The data obtained with the experimental appa-
                 ratus of ref. [11] were used to validate the simulation. Optical photon generation was included in
                 the application and the best agreement between data and Monte Carlo was obtained with the LUT
                 optical model [37]. The results of the simulation were then used to develop the vertex reconstruction
                 algorithm described in section 2.5.
                     The second application includes the full geometry of CRYSP1M and was used for the performance
                 evaluation detailed in section 3. Positrons inside the phantoms were generated with a kinetic energy
                 corresponding to the 18 F decay spectrum. However, simulation of optical photons is too computa-
                 tionally intense for a full detector. Thus, the energy deposition in the crystals is smeared with a
                 Gaussian FWHM of 6.3%, corresponding to the experimental energy resolution obtained in ref. [11].
                 The light-time emission profile and coincidence time resolution (CTR) were applied separately at the


                                                                                    9
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                       S.R. Soleti et al



                 analysis stage. A scintillation decay constant of 800 ns and a CTR of 1.5 ns FWHM were adopted,
                 consistent with the experimental results reported in ref. [11]. The decay time was implemented by
                 time-distributing the detected photoelectrons according to an exponential emission profile with the
                 corresponding decay constant, thereby reproducing the temporal response of the photosensor to the
                 scintillation pulse. Dead-time effects were modeled through the integration and pile-up processing
                 described in section 2.3.2. Interactions occurring within 500 ns were classified as unresolved pile-
                 up and treated as a single event, while pulses separated by more than 500 ns were assumed to be
                 resolvable by the electronics and to preserve the nominal energy resolution.
                     The acquisition parameters used in all performance studies are consistent with those expected
                 for the final detector operation and are summarized in Table 2. In particular, events were selected
                 within an energy window of 465–555 keV (corresponding to 3σ around 511 keV) and a coincidence
                 time window of 4.5 ns. These settings were adopted for both sensitivity and imaging simulations to
                 allow a fair comparison across all performance metrics.
                     In order to provide a consistent benchmark, we also simulated a reference LYSO-based PET scan-
                 ner under the same Monte Carlo framework and acquisition settings used for CRYSP. The geometry
                 and axial coverage were matched to the CRYSP configuration, with detector modules composed of
                 pixelated LYSO crystals (3 × 3 × 22 mm3 ) read out by SiPMs. The intrinsic parameters were set to
                 10% energy resolution, 40 ns decay time, an energy window of 435–585 keV (also here corresponding
                 to 3σ around 511 keV), and a 350 ps CTR, which lies midway between the performances reported
                 for the Biograph Vision Quadra (230 ps) [4] and the uEXPLORER (505 ps) [38], which enables TOF
                 reconstruction and is consistent with reported performances of state-of-the-art TBPET systems such
                 as the Biograph Vision Quadra [4] and uEXPLORER [38]. This virtual LYSO scanner serves as
                 a physically consistent reference for comparing sensitivity, NECR, and spatial resolution results,
                 complementing the image-reconstruction comparison, as shown in section 3.

                 2.5 Reconstruction of interaction vertex in CRYSP
                 In a pixelated detector, the reconstruction of the interaction vertex (iV) usually requires a single pixel
                 fired in the detector unit, typically built as an array of several pixels (e.g., in the Quadra scanner, a
                 mini block is made of 5 × 5 pixels, and each pixel has transverse dimensions of 3.2 × 3.2 mm2 , thus
                 a detector unit is a matrix of 25 pixels with dimensions 16 × 16 mm2 ). Imposing that the energy
                 deposited in the pixel is near 511 keV selects events at or very near the photoelectric peak.
                     The intrinsic spatial resolution in such a configuration is mainly determined by the crystal pitch
                 and thickness. The transverse
                                            √      position
                                                         √ of the interaction vertex (iV) can be approximated, in first
                 order, by FWHMt = 2 2 ln 2 × t/ 12, where t denotes the transverse dimension of the pixel.
                 For instance, in the Biograph Vision Quadra scanner, t = 3.2 mm      √ resulting √ in FWHMt = 2.1 mm.
                 Similarly, the d.o.i. resolution can be estimated as FWHMdoi = 2 2 ln 2×l/ 12, where l is the length
                 of the crystal. Considering again the example of the Quadra, l = 20 mm yields FWHMdoi = 13.3 mm.
                 These expressions represent simple geometrical estimates assuming a uniform interaction distribution
                 and are used as analytical proxies for the intrinsic sampling limits of pixelated PET detectors.
                     Thus, while the small size of the pixels guarantees excellent transverse resolution (at the cost of
                 a large number of channels), the d.o.i resolution is typically poor, even for dense crystals, such as
                 LYSO or BGO, since one requires typically a minimum of 2 radiation lengths (X0 ) for acceptable
                 sensitivity. An additional problem, whose impact becomes increasingly important as the AFOV of
                 the scanner increases, is that of parallax. Gammas entering the detectors at very large angle often
                 do not deposit their energy in the first pixel they encounter on their trajectory, but one or two pixels
                 further. Parallax results in large errors in the reconstruction of the iV. Additionally, gammas can
                 scatter in one pixel, depositing a fraction of their energy, before being fully absorbed in a neighboring
                 pixel. Such events are typically rejected, negatively impacting the sensitivity.
                     CsI has a longer radiation length (X0 ∼ 18.5 mm) and smaller photoelectric fraction than the
                 dense, high Zef f scintillators (BGO, LYSO), usually deployed in modern PET scanners. In a pixe-
                 lated detector this would translate to a larger error in the d.o.i, as well as in a smaller fraction of
                 selected events.
                     CRYSP, instead, proposes the use of monolithic crystals, of relatively larger dimensions, read out
                 by an array of large-area SiPMs (see section 2.2). The simple algorithm used for pixelated systems
                 cannot be applied in this case, since all the 64 SiPMs reading out the crystal have signal when a
                 gamma interacts in the crystal.
                     The adoption of monolithic crystals for PET and their potential regarding iV reconstruction is not
                 a novel topic [39, 40]. However, obtaining a resolution comparable with the transverse dimensions has
                 been historically challenging and classical algorithms fare relatively poorly [41]. Algorithms based on
                 multilayer perceptrons have also been implemented, providing similar results [42, 43]. Here, instead,


                                                           10
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                          S.R. Soleti et al



                 we show how excellent resolution in all three coordinates of the iV can be achieved using CNNs,
                 which have been widely adopted for image recognition tasks with extraordinary success [44, 45].
                     Furthermore, the use of CNNs allows to include in the sample events with a first Compton scatter
                 followed by photoelectric absorption, which deposit the full 511 keV in the same crystal. This is
                 a much larger fraction than pure photoelectric events, up to 60% of the total events, and is also
                 more significant in CsI than in higher Zef f materials such as LYSO and BGO. Most of these events
                 deposit their energy in two or more clusters in the crystal, but the two most energetic clusters add
                 up to a very large fraction of the total energy deposited, and thus determine the shape of the image.
                 Notably, the first true interaction vertex (e.g., the point at which the gamma truly interacts in the
                 crystal) coincides most of the time with the first apparent interaction vertex (e.g., the vertex closer
                 to the entry point of the gamma), thus resulting in unbiased, gaussian-distributed residuals between
                 the true interaction vertex of the gamma and the first apparent vertex predicted by our CNN-based
                 reconstruction algorithm, as shown in fig. 8.
                     Our CNN is, therefore, trained to search for two iVs (x1 , y1 , z1 , x2 , y2 , z2 ) where the index 1 is
                 assigned to the first apparent interaction vertex. Training the CNN to find two vertices rather than
                 one results in better determination of the position (since, in practice, an algorithm trained to find a
                 single vertex determines the barycenter of the interaction which may be several mm away from the
                 true vertex), and assigning the iV to the first apparent vertex is a good approximation to the true
                 vertex. The full network is made of three consecutive convolutional blocks (Conv2D + BatchNorm
                 + LeakyReLU + MaxPooling2D) followed by a Flatten, a Dropout, and a Dense layer yielding 6
                 outputs (x1 , y1 , z1 , x2 , y2 , z2 ).
                     The network has been trained for 10 epochs on 107 simulated events, with gammas uniformly
                 distributed in the transverse plane. The result is shown in fig. 8, where the difference between the
                 true interaction vertex and the CNN apparent vertex is plotted.√The data can be well described by
                 two Gaussians, with an effective resolution of approximately 2 2 ln 2 × 1.5 ≈ 3.5 mm in all three
                 coordinates.
                     The slightly larger error in the determination of the transverse coordinates, compared with pix-
                 elated PET scanners, is compensated by a much smaller error on the d.o.i. Notice, also, that the
                 resolution in the case of a monolithic crystal stays roughly constant with the transaxial angle, since
                 the determination of the iV is not affected by parallax (see section 3.2).
                     For the spatial resolution and image reconstruction studies of CRYSP described in the following
                 sections, the positions of the first interaction of the two gammas within the crystals are smeared
                 with the two Gaussian distributions of fig. 8 and are then used directly to define the listmode LORs.
                 Although a mild depth dependence of the spatial resolution exists (0.2–0.5 mm), in a monolithic
                 detector the d.o.i. is not known a priori and must be estimated from the light distribution. Thus,
                 as the reconstruction algorithm does not have access to the true depth, a depth-dependent intrinsic
                 smearing cannot be applied in a realistic system-level simulation. In the pixelated LYSO-based PET
                 system, where no dedicated d.o.i. encoding is assumed, the interaction position is assigned to the
                 geometric position of the crystal.

                                     1.2          σ1 = 1.08 mm (64%)               σ1 = 1.07 mm (63%)               σ1 = 1.24 mm (51%)
                                                  σ2 = 3.78 mm (36%)               σ2 = 3.76 mm (37%)               σ2 = 3.41 mm (49%)
                                     1.0




                 Normalized counts
                                     0.8

                                     0.6

                                     0.4

                                     0.2

                                     0.0
                                           −10            0            10   −10            0            10   −10            0            10
                                                 xtrue − xCNN [mm]                ytrue − yCNN [mm]                ztrue − zCNN [mm]

                 Figure 8: Residuals between the true interaction vertex of the gamma and the first apparent vertex
                 predicted by the CNN, in the three axes. The distributions have been fitted with the sum of two
                 Gaussians (dashed line).




                                                                            11
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                S.R. Soleti et al



                 3 Results
                 3.1 Sensitivity
                 The performance of CRYSP was benchmarked according to the NEMA NU 2-2018 standard [46]
                 using a Monte Carlo simulation of the setup, produced with a dedicated Geant4 [12] application,
                 as detailed in section 2.4. The sensitivity of CRYSP was measured by simulating a polyethylene
                 phantom with a length of 700 mm, an inner diameter of 2 mm, and an outer diameter of 3 mm.
                 The positron emission was generated uniformly within the inner part of the tubing, which was filled
                 with water. The events were selected in an energy window of 465–555 keV, which corresponds to
                 approximately 3.σ around the 511 keV peak, and a coincidence time window of 4.5 ns. These two
                 selection criteria were used also for the rest of the studies of this document, as specified in table 2.

                                                                                                                  Radial offset
                                                                                                                        0 cm
                                                                     10                                                 10 cm




                                      Axial sensitivity [kcps/MBq]
                                                                      8


                                                                      6


                                                                      4


                                                                      2


                                                                      0
                                                                          −400   −200          0            200       400
                                                                                      Axial position [mm]

                 Figure 9: Sensitivity as a function of the axial position for the CRYSP scanner with the phantom
                 placed at the center of the FOV (solid line) and with a radial offset of 10 cm (dashed line).

                     According to the NEMA NU 2-2018 protocol, five different simulations were carried out, adding
                 an aluminum sleeve with a thickness of 2.5 mm at each iteration. Finally, a sensitivity curve was
                 plotted versus the total aluminum thickness to extract the attenuation-corrected sensitivity.
                     The procedure was repeated in two different configurations, one with the phantom placed at the
                 center of the FOV and one with a radial offset of 10 cm, obtaining R0 cm = 120 ± 5 kcps/MBq and
                 R10 cm = 128 ± 5 kcps/MBq, respectively. Although these values are lower than those reported for
                 LYSO-based TBPETs (174 kcps/MBq for the uEXPLORER [47] and 176 kcps/MBq for the Quadra
                 [4]), the selected events exhibit less Compton contamination due to superior energy resolution, as
                 detailed in section 3.3. The attenuation-corrected sensitivity as a function of the axial position for
                 both radial offsets is reported in fig. 9. This results in reconstructed images of comparable quality
                 at parity of number of events (see section 3.5). For reference, our simulated LYSO-based PET
                 scanner yields a sensitivity of (177 ± 6) kcps/MBq, in excellent agreement with the reported Quadra
                 performance of 175.3 kcps/MBq [4], further supporting the validity of our Monte Carlo model.

                 3.2 Spatial resolution
                 Spatial resolution of the scanner has been quantified according to the NEMA standard by simulating
                 a point-like positron source placed at six different positions: in the axial direction at the center of
                 the AFOV and three-eights of the AFOV from the center and in the transverse direction at 1 cm,
                 10 cm, and 20 cm from the center. The resolution is measured for both the CRYSP and the reference
                 LYSO-based PET system in all three directions: radially, axially, and tangentially. Table 3 shows the
                 full width at half-maximum (FWHM) and full width at tenth-maximum (FWTM) amplitudes for the
                 six positions obtained with the filtered backprojection algorithm. Notably, the CRYSP performance
                 becomes significantly superior to that of the LYSO-based PET at large radial offsets and off-center
                 axial positions, where parallax effects in pixelated detectors degrade spatial resolution.

                 3.3 Count rates and NECR
                 The count-rate performance was evaluated for both the CRYSP and the reference LYSO-based PET
                 scanner using the NEMA NU 2–2018 protocol. A solid circular cylinder made of polyethylene with
                 an outer diameter of 203 mm, an overall length of 700 mm, and an internal volume of 22,000 mL was


                                                                                 12
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                                       S.R. Soleti et al



                 Table 3: FWHM and FWTM in all three directions for point-like sources at six different locations in
                 CRYSP and in the LYSO-based reference PET, obtained with the filtered backprojection algorithm.

                                                 Axial               Radial                      FWHM (mm)                                       FWTM (mm)
                    System                  position (mm)         offset (mm)          Radial     Axial Tangential                      Radial    Axial Tangential
                    CRYSP                   512 (1/2 of FOV)            10              3.35       3.42   3.42                           6.13      6.26    6.26
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)            10              3.36       3.41    3.41                          6.15      6.24    6.25
                    LYSO                    512 (1/2 of FOV)            10              3.52       3.61    3.61                          6.44      6.60    6.60
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)            10              3.51       3.62    3.61                          6.39      6.60    6.58
                    CRYSP                   512 (1/2 of FOV)           100              3.39       3.43   3.52                           6.21      6.28    6.44
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)           100              3.43       3.42    3.52                          6.28      6.26    6.44
                    LYSO                    512 (1/2 of FOV)           100              4.21       3.72    3.71                          7.68      6.78    6.76
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)           100              4.26       3.99    3.78                          7.77      7.27    6.89
                    CRYSP                   512 (1/2 of FOV)           200              3.53       3.47   3.79                           6.46      6.17    6.94
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)           200              3.69       3.60    3.97                          6.76      6.59    7.27
                    LYSO                    512 (1/2 of FOV)           200              4.89       4.61    3.94                          8.91      8.40    7.18
                                            128 (1/8 of FOV)           200              5.01       4.54    3.91                          9.13      8.27    7.13



                 simulated. The phantom was placed at the center of the FOV and axially aligned with the scanner.
                 A 6.4 mm hole, positioned 4 mm off the central axis, contained a 700 mm-long tubing (inner/outer
                 diameters of 3.2/4.8 mm) filled with a uniform positron source. In each configuration, 4.5 × 106
                 positrons were generated uniformly within the tubing volume, and the acquisition time window was
                 varied to reproduce different activity concentrations between 0 and 40 kBq/mL.
                     Rates of total, true, scattered, and noise-equivalent counts were calculated according to Section 4
                 of the NEMA NU 2–2018 standard and are shown in Fig. 10. A peak NECR of (1.79±0.04) Mcps was
                 obtained for CRYSP at an equivalent activity concentration of 14.0 kBq/mL, while the LYSO-based
                 PET reached (2.97 ± 0.05) Mcps at 25.6 kBq/mL, in good agreement with the reported measurement
                 from Quadra [4] (2.96 Mcps for MRD at 27.5 kBq/mL). The corresponding scatter fraction (SF) was
                 found to be approximately 20% for CRYSP and 40% for the LYSO-based PET, as shown in Fig. 10
                 (right), indicating that the improved energy resolution of cryogenic CsI effectively reduces scattered
                 coincidences by about a factor of two. Also in this case, the SF for the LYSO-based simulated PET
                 is in good agreement with the Quadra reported measurement [4].

                                                                                                                6                                                          0.6
                               14                                              NECR CRYSP                                   NECR CRYSP                SF CRYSP
                                                                               True                                         NECR LYSO PET             SF LYSO PET
                                                                               Scatter
                               12                                                                               5           NECR Quadra               SF Quadra            0.5
                                                                               Total
                                                                               Random
                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                 Scatter Fraction
                                                                                                                4                                                          0.4



                 Rate [Mcps]                                                                      Rate [Mcps]
                                8
                                                                                                                3                                                          0.3
                                6
                                                                                                                2                                                          0.2
                                4

                                                                                                                1                                                          0.1
                                2

                                0                                                                               0                                                          0.0
                                    0   5      10    15     20     25     30      35        40                      0   5   10     15    20      25       30        35   40
                                                    Activity [kBq / mL]                                                          Activity [kBq / mL]

                 Figure 10: Left: true (solid line), scatter (dashed line), random (dash-dotted line), and total (dotted
                 line), and NECR curve (red line) for the CRYSP system. Right: NECR curves (red, left axis) and
                 scatter fractions (black, right axis) for CRYSP (solid), the Biograph Vision Quadra [4] (dashed),
                 and a LYSO-based simulated PET scanner (dotted). Both plots are as a function of the activity
                 concentration in the phantom tubing.


                 3.4 Pile-up
                 In order to quantify the effect of pile-up more realistically, we simulated a simplified MIRD human
                 phantom [48] inside CRYSP1M, using approximate relative activities in each organ as detailed in
                 ref. [49]. Two scenarios are being considered: one where the patient’s entire upper body is inside
                 the scanner and another where the head is outside the FOV. In our simulation, signals pass through
                 the pile-up processor described in section 2.3.2. An event is classified as pile-up if the processor fails


                                                                                 13
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                                                      S.R. Soleti et al



                 to resolve a second signal arriving within the integration window of the first. Fig. 11 illustrates the
                 fraction of events with unresolved pile-up as a function of the activity administered to the patient.
                 For a typical PET administered activity of 300 MBq, approximately 20% of events fall into this
                 category. This fraction can be halved by positioning the patient’s head, where a significant portion
                 of the activity is concentrated, outside the FOV.
                     A key advantage of TBPETs, however, is their ability to maintain image quality with up to an
                 order of magnitude lower administered dose, as demonstrated by uEXPLORER [38]. At an activity
                 level of 30 MBq, this results in an almost negligible fraction of unresolved pile-up, approximately
                 2%. For comparison, in the reference LYSO-based PET scanner, the much shorter scintillation decay
                 time and smaller detector block area result in a negligible pile-up fraction under the same activity
                 conditions.
                                                        0.5
                                                                                           Full body                    500
                                                                                           No head
                                                                                                                        300
                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                        100




                                     Pile-up fraction
                                                        0.3                                                             −100

                                                                                                                        −300
                                                                                                                               z [mm]
                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                        −500

                                                        0.1                                                             −700

                                                                                                                        −900
                                                        0.0
                                                              0   100     200        300   400    500 −250     0      250
                                                                        Activity [MBq]                       x [mm]

                 Figure 11: Fraction of events with pile-up as a function of administered activity in two situations:
                 one with full upper body inside the scanner (solid lines) and one with the head outside the AFOV
                 (dashed lines). Simulation has been performed with a simplified MIRD model, shown on the right,
                 where the color corresponds to the number of electron-positron annihilations.



                 3.5 Image reconstruction in CRYSP
                 The quality of the images reconstructed by CRYSP represents the chief parameter to be compared
                 with existing solutions, since it encodes sensitivity, spatial resolution, time resolution, energy res-
                 olution and NECR performances. To do so, we compare the contrast recovery coefficient (CRC)
                 and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of CRYSP with the one of the simulated pixelated LYSO PET, as
                 described in section 2.4, with and without TOF capabilities.
                     In order to better assess the impact of Compton scattering with the patient’s body, we simulated
                 a modified Jaszczak phantom with an inner diameter of 266 mm (instead of the typical 216 mm)
                 and an axial length of 686 mm (instead of 186 mm), placed at the center of the AFOV. Adopting a
                 phantom with larger length and diameter allows for a more accurate estimation of Compton scattering
                 effects in human patients. This is particularly important in a TBPET, where a significant fraction
                 of detected gammas is emitted at low angles and passes through substantial portions of the body,
                 increasing the likelihood of Compton scattering. The simulation was performed with 3×109 electron-
                 positron annihilation events distributed in 10 s of time, corresponding to an activity concentration
                 of 7.9 kBq/mL. This value, although smaller than the peak NECR, has been chosen because it gives
                 a manageable pile-up fraction of less than 20%.
                     The CRC and SNR were calculated for all rod radii, both for rods placed near the center of the
                 phantom (inner rods) and for rods placed closer to the surface (outer rods), as shown in fig. 12.
                 Reconstruction has been performed with the parallelproj Python package [50], which allows to
                 run a highly-parallelized implementation of the MLEM algorithm on GPUs. The reconstruction
                 voxel size was set to 1 mm in all three axes, a value close to the spatial resolution obtained by
                 the CNN, and the algorithm was run for 10 iterations, where the CRC and SNR values plateau.
                 Normalization and attenuation corrections were applied in both cases and no point-spread function
                 modeling was used. A listmode MLEM algorithm was employed for both the CRYSP and the LYSO-
                 based PET reconstructions. All oblique LORs arising from the 100 cm axial coverage were included


                                                                                14
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                    S.R. Soleti et al




                      100 mm                          100 mm




                 Figure 12: Top: reconstructed images with a modified Jaszczak phantom for a PET scanner with
                 monolithic cryogenic CsI crystals (left) and pixelated LYSO crystals with TOF (center) and without
                 TOF (right). Normalization and attenuation corrections are applied and the color scale is the
                 same. Bottom: contrast recovery coefficients and signal-to-noise ratios as a function of the radius
                 of the inner (solid) and outer (dashed) rods. The regions being considered correspond to the red
                 circumferences shown above.


                 without any axial compression or sinogram rebinning. No time-of-flight (TOF) information was
                 used in the CRYSP case, given its CTR of 1.5 ns, which is insufficient to provide a meaningful
                 TOF constraint. For the LYSO-based PET system, reconstructions were performed both with TOF
                 information (assuming a 350 ps CTR) and without TOF, in order to assess the impact of TOF on
                 image quality. Voxel size and projector settings were kept identical across the two cases.
                     The plots show that a PET scanner based on monolithic CsI crystals has performances that can
                 be compared with ones employing LYSO pixels. Most interestingly, the CRC for rods placed near
                 the center of the phantom is significantly better with CsI: in this case, in fact, the probability for
                 a gamma to undergo Compton scattering in the phantom material is larger, and the significantly
                 better energy resolution of cryogenic CsI and its improved d.o.i. resolution more than compensates
                 for the lower sensitivity and lack of TOF. For the inner rods, the CRC goes from 21% for the smallest
                 radius (1.60 mm) to 96% for the largest one (5.55 mm). In the case of the outer rods, the variation
                 is smaller, from 39% to 68%. As expected, the pixelated LYSO-based PET reconstruction without
                 TOF performs worse than its TOF-enabled counterpart. Moreover, due to the combination of poorer
                 energy resolution and the absence of d.o.i. information, its performance is also inferior to that of
                 CRYSP.

                 4 Discussion
                 The development of Total-Body PET (TBPET) apparatus represents a major leap forward in medical
                 imaging. On one hand, it enables true multi-modal and multi-organ imaging; on the other, it allows
                 for significant reductions in radiation dose and/or acquisition time. These improvements open new
                 possibilities, such as routine PET imaging for children, and enable faster patient throughput.
                     While early demonstrators, such as the uEXPLORER scanner [3], achieve axial lengths of up to
                 200 cm, excellent performance can also be obtained with smaller coverage, with 100 cm representing


                                                          15
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                     S.R. Soleti et al



                 a good compromise for many applications, as demonstrated by the Biograph Vision Quadra [4].
                     However, the high costs associated with TBPETs may limit their widespread adoption. These
                 costs are dominated by the high price of LYSO, the material of choice for virtually all modern PET
                 scanners. LYSO is a rare earth material, and both its production and supply are highly concentrated
                 geographically, raising concerns about future availability and cost.
                     Another challenge is that increasing the axial length of a PET scanner faces a problem of dimin-
                 ishing returns, linked to two main issues: (i) increased multiple scattering as photons travel longer
                 distances through the patient’s body, and (ii) the parallax effect, which becomes a major source of
                 reconstruction error for photons traveling at small angles with respect to the z-axis.
                     The impact of multiple scattering can be mitigated by excellent energy resolution, allowing the
                 selection of photons with energies close to 511 keV, thereby reducing scattering. The parallax
                 effect, in turn, can be significantly suppressed by using monolithic crystals combined with modern
                 reconstruction techniques, such as those based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Monolithic
                 crystals also offer a substantial cost reduction compared with their pixelated counterparts.
                     The balance between d.o.i., TOF, and scatter fraction can be analyzed in terms of their re-
                 spective contributions to the SNR. p  The SNR gain provided by TOF information increases with the
                 patient diameter approximately as D/∆xTOF [51, 52], where ∆xTOF = c ∆t/2. For a 350 ps CTR
                 (∆xTOF ≈ 5.25 cm) and a 20 cm NEMA NECR phantom, this corresponds to an SNR improvement
                 of approximately ×1.95 relative to a non-TOF system.
                     Information on the d.o.i. in CRYSP reduces parallax broadening, resulting in a narrower and
                 more spatially uniform point spread function. While this does not necessarily translate into a global
                 increase in the image SNR, the better spatial resolution can reduce the partial volume effect [53], thus
                 improving the local SNR around small structures by limiting the spread of counts into neighboring
                 voxels. In addition, CRYSP exhibits a substantially lower scatter fraction (approximately 20% versus
                 40%
                 p for the LYSO-based configurations), corresponding to an expected SNR benefit of approximately
                    (1 − 0.2)/(1 − 0.4) ≈ 1.15. Consistent with these considerations, Fig. 12 shows that CRYSP
                 achieves SNR values comparable to those of the pixelated LYSO-based PET across the examined
                 rods, effectively compensating for the absence of TOF and clearly outperforming the non-TOF LYSO
                 configuration.
                     These considerations point to the possibility of developing a low-cost TBPET system based on
                 an abundant and inexpensive scintillator: CsI. The key realizations are that: (a) CsI must operate
                 at cryogenic temperatures, where it offers a light yield three times higher than LYSO and an energy
                 resolution roughly twice as good; and (b) the system should use monolithic crystals, which combine
                 lower cost with superior performance at large incidence angles.
                     The cost of monolithic CsI can be up to an order of magnitude lower than that of pixelated
                 LYSO, while cryogenic operation (in the well-understood regime of liquid nitrogen) adds no more
                 than about 5% to the cost of a conventional PET scanner. Importantly, 3D position reconstruction
                 via neural networks in monolithic crystals provides a complete solution to the parallax problem.
                     On the other hand, CsI exhibits a relatively slow decay time of about 1 µs. Despite this, its
                 high light yield allows coincidence timing resolutions on the order of the nanosecond, adequate for
                 many PET applications, although still worse than the TOF performance achievable with LYSO. In
                 addition, pile-up can become significant in high-rate environments, but specially designed electronics
                 can largely mitigate this effect, rendering it negligible in medium-rate applications, which are among
                 the strongest use cases for TBPET (e.g., dose reduction).
                     The results presented here demonstrate that the overall performance of a PET scanner based on
                 monolithic CsI crystals can be competitive with that of much more expensive and complex LYSO-
                 based systems. This offers a viable path to implementing TBPET technology at a cost affordable to
                 most hospitals.

                 5 Conclusion
                 This work introduces CRYSP, a novel PET system based on cryogenic pure CsI monolithic crystals,
                 with the potential to achieve high performance at significantly reduced cost. Operating at cryogenic
                 temperatures, CsI provides a light yield of approximately 105 photons/MeV, resulting in an energy
                 resolution better than 7% FWHM [11]. Despite its relatively slow scintillation decay time, it can
                 achieve a coincidence timing resolution of about 1.5 ns, sufficient for PET applications.
                     Simulation studies indicate millimeter-scale spatial resolution for interaction vertex reconstruc-
                 tion within a monolithic cryogenic CsI crystal. Overall, the simulated CRYSP1M scanner achieves
                 sensitivity, NECR, and CRCs comparable to existing systems of similar size, despite the absence
                 of TOF capabilities. Notably, CRYSP1M has the potential to outperform a pixelated LYSO PET




                                                          16
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                    S.R. Soleti et al



                 scanner in situations where energy resolution is critical, such as imaging samples with a high fraction
                 of Compton-scattered gamma rays.
                     While cryogenics is standard in other medical imaging modalities (e.g., MRI), its application in
                 PET devices is new. In contrast to MRI, CRYSP cryogenics requires only a liquid nitrogen bath,
                 enabling the use of conventional, low-cost cooling and signal-extraction techniques (e.g., inexpensive
                 feedthroughs). As a result, cryogenics adds less than 5% to the overall device cost and can be
                 implemented transparently for the end user.
                     In summary, CRYSP offers a promising, cost-effective, high-performance alternative for TBPET
                 scanners, with the potential to significantly expand access to advanced PET imaging in both clinical
                 and research contexts.

                 Acknowledgments
                 The authors are thankful to Georg Schramm for the precious help with parallelproj.

                 Funding
                 SRS acknowledges the support of a fellowship from “la Caixa Foundation” (ID 100010434) with code
                 LCF/BQ/PI22/11910019 and of a grant from the Basque Country Government with code PUE24-10.
                 JR acknowledges support from the Generalitat Valenciana of Spain under grant CIDEXG/2023/16.

                 Data availability
                 The data that support the findings of this study are available upon reasonable request from the
                 authors.

                 References
                  [1] S. Vandenberghe, P. Moskal, and J. S. Karp, “State of the art in total body PET,” EJNMMI
                      physics, vol. 7, pp. 1–33, 2020.

                  [2] V. Nadig, K. Herrmann, F. M. Mottaghy, and V. Schulz, “Hybrid total-body pet scan-
                      ners—current status and future perspectives,” European journal of nuclear medicine and molec-
                      ular imaging, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 445–459, 2022.
                  [3] S. R. Cherry et al., “Total-body PET: maximizing sensitivity to create new opportunities for
                      clinical research and patient care,” Journal of Nuclear Medicine, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2018.
                  [4] G. A. Prenosil, H. Sari, M. Fürstner, A. Afshar-Oromieh, K. Shi, A. Rominger, and
                      M. Hentschel, “Performance characteristics of the Biograph Vision Quadra PET/CT system
                      with a long axial field of view using the NEMA NU 2-2018 standard,” Journal of nuclear
                      medicine, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 476–484, 2022.

                  [5] S. Yamagishi, K. Miwa, S. Kamitaki, K. Anraku, S. Sato, T. Yamao, H. Kubo, N. Miyaji,
                      and K. Oguchi, “Performance Characteristics of a New-Generation Digital Bismuth Germanium
                      Oxide PET/CT System, Omni Legend 32, According to NEMA NU 2-2018 Standards,” Journal
                      of Nuclear Medicine, vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 1990–1997, 2023.
                  [6] J. P. Schmall, J. S. Karp, M. Werner, and S. Surti, “Parallax error in long-axial field-of-view
                      PET scanners—a simulation study,” Physics in Medicine & Biology, vol. 61, no. 14, p. 5443,
                      2016.
                  [7] S. Surti, A. R. Pantel, and J. S. Karp, “Total body PET: why, how, what for?” IEEE transac-
                      tions on radiation and plasma medical sciences, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 283–292, 2020.
                  [8] H. Zaidi and M.-L. Montandon, “Scatter compensation techniques in PET,” PET clinics, vol. 2,
                      no. 2, pp. 219–234, 2007.
                  [9] V. Mikhailik et al., “Luminescence and scintillation properties of CsI – a potential cryogenic
                      scintillator,” physica status solidi (b), vol. 252, no. 4, pp. 804–810, 2015.
                 [10] C. M. Lewis and J. I. Collar, “Response of undoped cryogenic CsI to low-energy nuclear recoils,”
                      Phys. Rev. C, vol. 104, no. 1, p. 014612, 2021.
                 [11] S. R. Soleti, A. Castillo, J. I. Collar, M. del Barrio-Torregrosa, C. Echeverria, M. Seemann,
                      D. Zerzion, and J. J. G. Cadenas, “Cryogenic cesium iodide as a potential PET material,”
                      JINST, vol. 20, p. P06038, 2025.


                                                          17
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                    S.R. Soleti et al



                 [12] S. Agostinelli et al., “GEANT4–a simulation toolkit,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, vol. 506, pp.
                      250–303, 2003.
                 [13] Luxium, “Scintillation crystals,” https://luxiumsolutions.com/radiation-detection-scintillators/
                      crystal-scintillators/lyso-scintillation-crystals, 2024.
                 [14] N. Atanov et al., “Design and status of the Mu2e electromagnetic calorimeter,” Nucl. Instrum.
                      Meth. A, vol. 824, pp. 695–698, 2016.
                 [15] M. Doroshenko et al., “Undoped-CsI calorimeter for the K(L)0 —> pi0 nu anti-nu experiment
                      at KEK-PS,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, vol. 545, pp. 278–295, 2005.
                 [16] C. Amsler, D. Grögler, W. Joffrain, D. Lindelöf, M. Marchesotti, P. Niederberger, H. Pruys,
                      C. Regenfus, P. Riedler, and A. Rotondi, “Temperature dependence of pure CsI: scintillation
                      light yield and decay time,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
                      Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 480, no. 2-3, pp. 494–500,
                      2002.
                 [17] K. Ding, J. Liu, Y. Yang, K. Scholberg, and D. M. Markoff, “Performance of a liquid nitrogen
                      cryostat setup for the study of nuclear recoils in undoped CsI crystals,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth.
                      A, vol. 1063, p. 169283, 2024.
                 [18] M. Conti, L. Eriksson, H. Rothfuss, and C. L. Melcher, “Comparison of fast scintillators with
                      TOF PET potential,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 926–933, 2009.
                 [19] S. Kubota, S. Sakuragi, S. Hashimoto, and J.-z. Ruan, “A new scintillation material: Pure
                      CsI with 10 ns decay time,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
                      Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 268, no. 1, pp. 275–277,
                      1988.
                 [20] M. Moszyński, M. Balcerzyk, W. Czarnacki, M. Kapusta, W. Klamra, P. Schotanus, A. Syntfeld,
                      M. Szawlowski, and V. Kozlov, “Energy resolution and non-proportionality of the light yield
                      of pure CsI at liquid nitrogen temperatures,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
                      Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 537,
                      no. 1-2, pp. 357–362, 2005.
                 [21] M. Janecek, “Reflectivity spectra for commonly used reflectors,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
                      Science, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 490–497, 2012.
                 [22] Hamamatsu,      “MPPC S14160-6050HS,” https://www.hamamatsu.com/eu/en/product/
                      optical-sensors/mppc/mppc mppc-array/S14160-6050HS.html, 2024.
                 [23] G. Matteucci, “Cryogenic SiPMs for the optical readout of DarkSide-20k,” JINST, vol. 20,
                      no. 06, p. C06010, 2025.
                 [24] A. A. Abud et al., “Design, construction and operation of the ProtoDUNE-SP Liquid Argon
                      TPC,” JINST, vol. 17, no. 01, p. P01005, 2022.
                 [25] K. Ieki et al., “Large-Area MPPC with Enhanced VUV Sensitivity for Liquid Xenon Scintillation
                      Detector,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, vol. 925, pp. 148–155, 2019.
                 [26] A. Nepomuk Otte, D. Garcia, T. Nguyen, and D. Purushotham, “Characterization of Three
                      High Efficiency and Blue Sensitive Silicon Photomultipliers,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, vol. 846,
                      pp. 106–125, 2017.
                 [27] R. Iwai, M. Sakurai, A. Antognini, I. Belosevic, M. Hildebrandt, K. Kirch, A. Knecht, A. Papa,
                      and A. Stoykov, “Characterization of Cryogenic SiPM Down to 6.5 K,” JPS Conf. Proc., vol. 27,
                      p. 012005, 2019.
                 [28] E. Currás-Rivera, F. Blanc, G. Haefeli, R. Marchevski, F. Ronchetti, O. Schneider, L. Shchutska,
                      and G. Zunica, “Cryogenic operation of silicon photomultiplier arrays,” 2 2025.
                 [29] P. Ferrario, “Status and perspectives of the PETALO project,” Journal of Instrumentation,
                      vol. 17, no. 01, p. C01057, 2022.
                 [30] N. Salor-Iguiñiz et al., “Evaluation of coincidence time resolution in a liquid xenon detector
                      with silicon photomultipliers,” Phys. Rev. Res., vol. 7, no. 3, p. 033089, 2025.


                                                         18
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                  S.R. Soleti et al



                 [31] D. R. Schaart, “Physics and technology of time-of-flight PET detectors,” Physics in Medicine
                      & Biology, vol. 66, no. 9, p. 09TR01, 2021.
                 [32] S. Pourashraf, A. Gonzalez-Montoro, M. S. Lee, J. W. Cates, J. Y. Won, J. S. Lee, and C. S.
                      Levin, “Investigation of electronic signal processing chains for a prototype TOF-PET system
                      With 100-ps coincidence time resolution,” IEEE transactions on radiation and plasma medical
                      sciences, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 690–696, 2021.
                 [33] J. Kalisz, “Review of methods for time interval measurements with picosecond resolution,”
                      Metrologia, vol. 41, no. 1, p. 17, 2003.

                 [34] S. Xie, X. Zhang, Q. Huang, Z. Gong, J. Xu, and Q. Peng, “Methods to Compensate the Time
                      Walk Errors in Timing Measurements for PET Detectors,” IEEE Transactions on Radiation
                      and Plasma Medical Sciences, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 555–562, 2020.
                 [35] M.-R. Mohammadian-Behbahani and S. Saramad, “A comparison study of the pile-up
                      correction algorithms,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
                      Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 951, p. 163013, 2020.
                      [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900219313804
                 [36] F. Loignon-Houle, C. M. Pepin, S. A. Charlebois, and R. Lecomte, “Reflectivity quenching of
                      ESR multilayer polymer film reflector in optically bonded scintillator arrays,” Nuclear Instru-
                      ments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and
                      Associated Equipment, vol. 851, pp. 62–67, 2017.
                 [37] M. Janecek and W. W. Moses, “Simulating Scintillator Light Collection Using Measured Optical
                      Reflectance,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 964–970, 2010.
                 [38] R. D. Badawi et al., “First human imaging studies with the EXPLORER total-body PET
                      scanner,” Journal of Nuclear Medicine, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 299–303, 2019.

                 [39] A. González-Montoro, F. Sanchez, P. Bruyndonckx, G. Cañizares, J. M. Benlloch, and A. J.
                      González, “Novel method to measure the intrinsic spatial resolution in PET detectors based on
                      monolithic crystals,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accel-
                      erators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 920, pp. 58–67, 2019.

                 [40] A. Gonzalez-Montoro, A. J. Gonzalez, S. Pourashraf, R. S. Miyaoka, P. Bruyndonckx, G. Chinn,
                      L. A. Pierce, and C. S. Levin, “Evolution of PET detectors and event positioning algorithms
                      using monolithic scintillation crystals,” IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical
                      Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 282–305, 2021.
                 [41] X. Li, C. Lockhart, T. K. Lewellen, and R. S. Miyaoka, “A high resolution, monolithic crystal,
                      PET/MRI detector with DOI positioning capability,” in 2008 30th Annual International Con-
                      ference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE, 2008, pp. 2287–2290.
                 [42] M. Freire, J. Barrio, N. Cucarella, C. Valladares, A. Gonzalez-Montoro, C. de Alfonso, J. Ben-
                      lloch, and A. Gonzalez, “Position estimation using neural networks in semi-monolithic PET
                      detectors,” Physics in Medicine & Biology, vol. 67, no. 24, p. 245011, 2022.

                 [43] A. Iborra, A. González, A. Gonzalez-Montoro, A. Bousse, and D. Visvikis, “Ensemble of neural
                      networks for 3D position estimation in monolithic PET detectors,” Physics in Medicine &
                      Biology, vol. 64, no. 19, p. 195010, 2019.
                 [44] Z. Li, F. Liu, W. Yang, S. Peng, and J. Zhou, “A survey of convolutional neural networks: anal-
                      ysis, applications, and prospects,” IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems,
                      vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 6999–7019, 2021.
                 [45] R. Yamashita, M. Nishio, R. K. G. Do, and K. Togashi, “Convolutional neural networks: an
                      overview and application in radiology,” Insights into imaging, vol. 9, pp. 611–629, 2018.
                 [46] N. E. M. Association, “NEMA standards publication NU 2–2018: performance measurements
                      of Positron Emission Tomographs,” National Electrical Manufacturers Association, 2018.




                                                         19
IOP Publishing   Phys. Med. Biol. vv (yyyy) aaaaaa                                                   S.R. Soleti et al



                 [47] B. A. Spencer, E. Berg, J. P. Schmall, N. Omidvari, E. K. Leung, Y. G. Abdelhafez, S. Tang,
                      Z. Deng, Y. Dong, Y. Lv et al., “Performance evaluation of the uEXPLORER total-body
                      PET/CT scanner based on NEMA NU 2-2018 with additional tests to characterize PET scan-
                      ners with a long axial field of view,” Journal of Nuclear Medicine, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 861–870,
                      2021.
                 [48] A. A. Parach, H. Rajabi, and M. A. Askari, “Assessment of MIRD data for internal dosimetry
                      using the GATE Monte Carlo code,” Radiation and environmental biophysics, vol. 50, pp. 441–
                      450, 2011.
                 [49] A. H. Dias, A. K. Hansen, O. L. Munk, and L. C. Gormsen, “Normal values for
                      18F-FDG uptake in organs and tissues measured by dynamic whole body multiparametric
                      FDG PET in 126 patients,” EJNMMI Research, vol. 12, 2022. [Online]. Available:
                      https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:247246383
                 [50] G. Schramm and K. Thielemans, “PARALLELPROJ—an open-source framework for fast cal-
                      culation of projections in tomography,” Frontiers in Nuclear Medicine, vol. 3, p. 1324562, 2024.

                 [51] T. F. Budinger, “Time-of-flight positron emission tomography: status relative to conventional
                      PET,” pp. 73–78, 1983.
                 [52] S. Vandenberghe, E. Mikhaylova, E. D’Hoe, P. Mollet, and J. S. Karp, “Recent developments
                      in time-of-flight PET,” EJNMMI physics, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 3, 2016.

                 [53] J. G. Mannheim, I. Rausch, M. Conti, C. la Fougère, and F. P. Schmidt, “Characterization of
                      the partial volume effect along the axial field-of-view of the Biograph Vision Quadra total-body
                      PET/CT system for multiple isotopes,” EJNMMI physics, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 33, 2023.




                                                         20
